= SageTeX =

== Description ==

The SageTeX package allows you to embed code, results of computations,
and plots from Sage into LaTeX documents.

== License ==

The ''source code'' of the SageTeX package may be redistributed and/or
modified under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published
by the Free Software Foundation, either version 2 of the License, or (at
your option) any later version. To view a copy of this license, see
[[http://www.gnu.org/licenses/]] or send a letter to the Free Software
Foundation, Inc., 51 Franklin Street, Fifth Floor, Boston, MA
02110-1301, USA.

The ''documentation'' of the SageTeX package is licensed under the
Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike 3.0 License. To view a copy of
this license, visit [[http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/]]
or send a letter to Creative Commons, 171 Second Street, Suite 300, San
Francisco, California, 94105, USA.

The included files `tkz-berge.sty` and `tkz-graph.sty` are from
[[http://altermundus.com/pages/tkz/]] and are licensed under the "LaTeX
Project Public License Distributed from CTAN archives in directory
macros/latex/base/lppl.txt"; see
[[http://mirror.ctan.org/macros/latex/base/lppl.txt]].

== Upstream Contact ==

Author: Dan Drake. Web: [[http://www.bitbucket.org/ddrake/sagetex]] and
[[http://mathsci.kaist.ac.kr/~drake]].

== Dependencies ==

To install, nothing more than a standard Sage install. The
`spkg-check` script will exit without actually testing anything if
it cannot find "latex" in your path.

== Notes ==

To use SageTeX, both Sage and LaTeX need to know about it. SageTeX comes
standard with Sage, so you only need to make sure LaTeX can find what it
needs. Full details are in the Sage installation guide at
http://sagemath.org/doc/installation/ .

The directory `$SAGE_ROOT/local/share/texmf/tex/generic/sagetex`
contains documentation and an example file. If you have problems or
suggestions see [[http://groups.google.com/group/sage-support|the
sage-support group]].

If you want to help develop SageTeX, please clone the bitbucket
Mercurial repository (see the "Upstream Contact" above) and send me
patches based on that.

Finally, note that you can actually use SageTeX without Sage! The
`remote-sagetex.py` script uses any remote Sage server to do the
computations for you. If you can't or don't want to install Sage on your
computer, you can use the `remote-sagetex` script to use SageTeX,
although if you are in such a situation, you probably want to get
SageTeX [[http://tug.ctan.org/pkg/sagetex|from CTAN]] instead of
downloading this spkg.

== Changelog ==

=== sagetex-2.3.4 (Dan Drake, 20 Mar 2013) ===
 * Copy example.tex into the doc directory too. (Ticket #14246)

=== sagetex-2.3.3.p2 (John Palmieri, 11 Feb 2012) ===
 * Use "#!/usr/bin/env bash" at the top of spkg-check so it works on
   OpenSolaris (ticket #12500).

=== sagetex-2.3.3.p1 (Dan Drake, 16 Jan 2012) ===

 * Improve mechanism for preventing multiply-defined labels (ticket
   12267), and also keep track of label names when recording maximum
   counter seen. Also improve version mismatch checking to be backwards
   compatible (fixes ticket 8035).

=== sagetex-2.3.1.p1 (Dan Drake, 18 Nov 2011) ===

 * Comment out tkz-berge and other TikZ stuff from example file; don't
   distribute tkz-* with SageTeX; fix spkg-check so that we can actually
   run and pass checks on this spkg. See #11583.

=== sagetex-2.3.1 (Dan Drake, 27 May 2011) ===

 * Include various fixes; see #10146. This now installs the PDFs of the
   documentation to SAGE_ROOT/local/share/doc/sagetex as a sort of
   halfway-not-really implementation of the SAGE_SPKG_INSTALL_DOCS
   stuff. (See #10908 and #11197.)

=== sagetex-2.3 (Dan Drake, 20 Oct 2010) ===

 * Now includes the sagecommandline environment by Volker Braun.

=== sagetex-2.2.5 (Dan Drake, 25 Mar 2010) ===

 * Better implementation of the sageexample environment; 3D plots now
   automatically fall back to using PNG.

=== sagetex-2.2.4 (Dan Drake, 14 Mar 2010) ===

 * Special spkg for Nicolas Thiery; this includes the sageexample
   environment and some basic documentation. This spkg won't get
   distributed with Sage.

=== sagetex-2.2.3.p0 (Dan Drake, 2 Mar 2010) ===

 * Couple documentation fixes; spkg-check now bails if it can't find
   tkz-berge.sty (since the example file needs that)

=== sagetex-2.2.3 (Dan Drake, 30 Dec 2009) ===

 * New spkg, with instructions that reflect SageTeX's inclusion as a
   standard spkg.

=== sagetex-2.2.1 (Dan Drake, 20 June 2009) ===

 * Update to version 2.2.1, which includes the remote-sagetex script and
   synchronizes with the current version available on CTAN.

=== sagetex-2.1.1 (Dan Drake, 28 May 2009) ===

 * Update to version 2.1.1, which adds pause/unpause support.

=== sagetex-2.0.2 (Dan Drake, 21 Apr 2008) ===

 * Update source, improve spkg-check.

=== sagetex-2.0.p0 (Dan Drake, 9 Jan 2008) ===

 * Proper SPKG.txt, spkg-check, md5sums
 * Split repos, get directory structure right

=== sagetex-2.0 (Dan Drake, 18 Dec 2008) ===

 * Initial release
