build/pkgs/gap3/SPKG.rst, before:


Jean Michel's GAP 3 distribution
================================

Description
-----------

This package installs Jean Michel's pre-packaged GAP3, which is a
minimal GAP3 distribution containing packages that have no equivalent in
GAP4.

Below is the full description from Jean Michel's webpage (accessed 23
July 2015).

   A pre-packaged GAP3 with everything you need

   To help people who are just interested in GAP3 because they need a
   package
   which has not been ported to GAP4, I have prepared an easy-to install
   minimal GAP3 distribution containing an up-to-date versions of the
   packages:

   anusq, arep, autag, chevie, cryst, dce, grim, matrix, meataxe,
   monoid,
   nq, pcqa, sisyphos, specht, ve, vkcurve.

   These packages have been chosen since most have no equivalent in
   GAP4. They
   are autoloaded when starting gap.

   This distribution includes only partial lists of small groups,
   2-groups,
   3-groups, character tables from the Atlas and tables of marks. It
   does not
   include either the packages:

   anupq, grape, kbmag, xgap, cohomolo, gliss, guava, xmod

   which have some equivalent in GAP4. You can get these extra features
   at

   http://www.math.rwth-aachen.de/~Frank.Luebeck/gap/GAP3

   In this distribution:

-  The on-line help includes the documentation of the included packages.
-  The html documentation (htm/index.html) also does.
-  The manual (manual.pdf) also does.

License
-------

Most parts of the GAP distribution, including the core part of the GAP
system, are distributed under the terms of the GNU General Public
License (see http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html or the file GPL in the
etc directory of the GAP installation).


SPKG Maintainers
----------------

-  Christian Stump <christian.stump@gmail.com>


Upstream Contact
----------------

Jean Michel <jmichel@math.jussieu.fr>
http://webusers.imj-prg.fr/~jean.michel/


Special Update/Build Instructions
---------------------------------

The difference between the distributed tarball and Jean Michel's
original tarball also contains the binaries

Patches
~~~~~~~

None

Dependencies
------------

None

Commit message:

build/pkgs/[a-z]*/SPKG.rst: Reformat title in format 'spkg_name: Short description' -- completes coverage of all experimental packages

build/pkgs/gap3/SPKG.rst, after:

gap3: A minimal distribution of GAP 3 containing packages that have no equivalent in GAP 4
==========================================================================================

Description
-----------

This package installs Jean Michel's pre-packaged GAP3, which is a
minimal GAP3 distribution containing packages that have no equivalent in
GAP4.

Below is the full description from Jean Michel's webpage (accessed 23
July 2015).

   A pre-packaged GAP3 with everything you need

   To help people who are just interested in GAP3 because they need a
   package
   which has not been ported to GAP4, I have prepared an easy-to install
   minimal GAP3 distribution containing an up-to-date versions of the
   packages:

   anusq, arep, autag, chevie, cryst, dce, grim, matrix, meataxe,
   monoid,
   nq, pcqa, sisyphos, specht, ve, vkcurve.

   These packages have been chosen since most have no equivalent in
   GAP4. They
   are autoloaded when starting gap.

   This distribution includes only partial lists of small groups,
   2-groups,
   3-groups, character tables from the Atlas and tables of marks. It
   does not
   include either the packages:

   anupq, grape, kbmag, xgap, cohomolo, gliss, guava, xmod

   which have some equivalent in GAP4. You can get these extra features
   at

   http://www.math.rwth-aachen.de/~Frank.Luebeck/gap/GAP3

   In this distribution:

-  The on-line help includes the documentation of the included packages.
-  The html documentation (htm/index.html) also does.
-  The manual (manual.pdf) also does.

License
-------

Most parts of the GAP distribution, including the core part of the GAP
system, are distributed under the terms of the GNU General Public
License (see http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html or the file GPL in the
etc directory of the GAP installation).


SPKG Maintainers
----------------

-  Christian Stump <christian.stump@gmail.com>


Upstream Contact
----------------

Jean Michel <jmichel@math.jussieu.fr>
http://webusers.imj-prg.fr/~jean.michel/


Special Update/Build Instructions
---------------------------------

The difference between the distributed tarball and Jean Michel's
original tarball also contains the binaries

Patches
~~~~~~~

None

Dependencies
------------

None
